Now we are going to look at the techniques of taking creative decisions or the techniques of creativity.
In general, for most tasks that managers solve in their everyday life, special creativity is not required.
Most often they use knowledge, skills, intuition, and with their help ideally achieve the desired result.
However, in times of rapid, rapid changes and very tough competition, managers can rely less and less on standard solutions, which are sometimes also called routine solutions,
and often it is necessary to find a new solution in an unusual way.
Creative solutions are called solutions found in an unusual way, but nevertheless, they meet the same requirements as standard solutions.
But the ability to find such solutions is called creativity.
And we are going to look at the techniques that help in finding these creative solutions.
But before we move on to the techniques, let's see what are the main characteristics of a creative idea.
The first requirement or the first characteristic says that this idea should be outside of the usual, thoughtful, so-called paths.
Moreover, it should not be isolated, it should be connected with routine, usual, traditional thinking.
And most importantly, it should work, that is, bring a fruitful result.
Unfortunately, it is inevitable that a good creative solution, most often realized in a new product, in a new service, in a new, improved process,
very quickly turns into a routine, because a very large number of successors appear.
An example of this is the appearance of black crackers, three crusts, not so long ago.
The idea is simple, and at the same time it turned out to be so profitable that the market was instantly overflowing with all kinds of crackers,
black, salty, with garlic, and so on.
But the very development of this creative idea is a very difficult task.
Of course, some of the managers can visit a brilliant idea and it will come to life.
But most often, the development of new ideas is done professionally.
For this purpose, large organizations have a whole staff of specialists,
who can be allocated to separate departments, which are called, in different organizations, can be called in different ways,
this is a design office, and, if we speak English, what is called Research and Development, that is, the department of development of a new product.
And in order to systematize the work on the development of creative new solutions,
today, three methods are used most widely, which are called six thinking hats, proposed by Edward de Bono,
three thinking chairs, which were created by Walt Disney, and the method of synecdoche.
We are now proceeding to their consideration.
Six thinking chairs were proposed by Edward de Bono, and are very closely related to the techniques of imagination.
The method can be used to study the prospects of development of a complex situation or problem, which requires comprehensive consideration.
This technique helps to think over the problem from different points of view,
since each so-called hat, or rather a person sitting in this hat has his own view of things.
The view is fixed behind each hat.
Hats can be replaced with some other distinguishing features,
these can be on the sleeve, these can be cards, but they must be of the same colors,
white, red, black, yellow, green and blue.
But those who have already played this game, have used this method, say that hats are better, there is nothing.
And another undoubted advantage of this technique is that it can be used to make individual decisions.
In this case, a person will sit in turn in each of these hats,
and you can work in a group, then each of the participants will have at a certain time one or another hat.
What do hats mean and what are their prescribed points of view?
An observer, an expert, usually puts on a white hat.
He must always take a neutral position and focus on the available information and objective facts.
But a red hat is a sensual hat, the emphasis is on emotions, feelings, intuition, judgment, premonition, and so on.
It presents its views without explanations and evidence.
That is, a person sitting in a red hat can say anything that comes to his mind.
A black hat is intended to be a ruthless judge, dressed in a black mantle, strict, and may even be slightly biased to judge what others say.
The emphasis is on criticism and doubt.
As a rule, a person sitting in a black hat should express, justify his logically negative view of things.
A person sitting in a yellow hat should express a logically positive, optimistic view of things.
It should find advantages, benefits, highlight the good points in the idea that others express.
A green hat should focus on creative thinking, build hypotheses, make assumptions, express hypotheses, generate new ideas.
And finally, a blue hat.
In principle, it is also better to sit in a blue hat to an observer, an expert.
A blue hat is intended to be a cold-blooded and detached position.
This hat, or rather, a person sitting in a blue hat should be able to generalize everything that has been said.
The person's responsibility includes the control of processes, sequence of speeches of other hats, recording of their thoughts.
He controls the chairman, the organizer.
And, in fact, he is supposed to think about the thoughts that were spoken out loud during the conversation.
And after one round, in principle, all participants in this game should change hats.
The question arises, in what order can and should hats be changed?
In principle, you can work in the order in which we have just listed them.
And you can choose hats randomly, for example, by pulling out a card from a stack of these cards.
But it is very important to decide how the hat change or hat transition will take place before the game starts.
And one more point.
Since we have a black hat, a critic, a judge,
it is quite reasonable to introduce a black hat not too early, so that it, so to speak, does not cut a good idea,
does not give the opportunity to doubt those who would like to speak in an extraordinary way.
If, as I have already said, one person can sit in hats and mentally represent himself in different roles,
then in the group each of the participants changes one or another hat as one round goes on.
The main advantage of this method is that people are more open-minded.
When they put on a hat, they know that they must express a critical point of view, a fantasy point of view, and so on.
That is, it removes some tension and very often a conflict,
allowing people to express deep personal thoughts, considerations, sometimes just crazy to express ideas, and so on.
And it is more convenient for them to defend these ideas, because they do not defend their ideas, but the ideas that belong to the mental hat.
The mental hats have a very big advantage, and this method can be used quite widely.
In the textbook you have written a little more about the sequence, about the procedure of this method.
It is not as simple as it seems, because it is quite difficult to switch to another way of thinking,
but nevertheless this method is very, very productive when set correctly.
The next method is called the three-way mental chair.
It is somewhat similar to the previous method.
It was developed by Walt Disney, a very restless person, very creative.
At first he used this method for himself personally.
And in order to develop something, he initially imagined himself in different roles,
while moving to different rooms, then the room shrank to the size of a chair,
and in principle, then, from the attachment to a place, to a chair, Walt Disney switched to thinking,
imagining himself as if sitting on a chair, a dreamer, a realist or a critic.
The strategy of this method is that in your thoughts you need to consistently proceed from different positions,
to connect these positions better with certain places in order to consolidate.
For a beginner to work with this method, it may be useful to use Walt Disney's method.
For a dreamer to sit on a chair in one setting,
to switch to a chair of a realist, to move to another room, to another setting, and so on.
And with the development of the skill, it will be possible to stay on the same chair,
but to imagine yourself in different roles.
In the same way as with hats, it is necessary to note that there are certain recommendations
on when and where and who to be.
So, to finish work on the project, you need to be realistic, if possible.
A dreamer's chair. What should a person who has become a dreamer do?
He should invent the most fantastic things, play with various possibilities,
and best of all, with some impossibilities, something out of the realm of what is not real enough today.
He is allowed to turn everything upside down, to say absurd things, and to combine, at first glance, the incompatible.
In principle, you can do everything, but you don't need to think about your problem seriously.
You need to play, you need to juggle your thoughts, and so on.
In principle, for a beginner and for working in a group, it is better to write down your ideas and ideas on paper.
If you work alone, then on paper, and if the methodology works in a group,
then, in principle, it is possible to use sound recording techniques.
A realistic chair.
In this place, a person should include his common sense,
but it is necessary to develop, to understand, maybe to land in something,
the crazy ideas of a dreamer, and thereby try to find new rational solutions.
You need to move forward very planarly and reasonably.
To do this, it is desirable to choose a short and purposeful path.
A person sitting on a realistic chair should be pragmatic.
And finally, a critic's chair.
The duty of a person who has become a critic is to subject all previously expressed ideas of merciless criticism,
asking himself all kinds of questions.
Is there anything in these ideas at all?
Can they be used, taking into account the current day, the level of science and technology development, and so on?
Are they worth it? Will the consumer notice them? And so on.
In principle, the methodology of three thinking chairs, as well as the methodology of thinking hats, can work in a group.
And in both cases, if the work takes place in a group, even if individually,
the duration of the game should not exceed two hours.
The strong and weak sides of these two methods.
The first strong side is that they allow you to distance yourself from the problem.
They cover many points of view, especially if the lesson is held in a group.
And they help to relieve, as I said, tension, especially in thinking hats during group games.
But these methods also have weak sides of a certain kind of limitation.
First of all, the weak side is that it is quite difficult for a person to leave the traditional, let's say, the patterned, usual way of thinking.
And making a decision without a certain training of using these methods, they can be quite close to the traditional way.
And another relatively weak side, which is quickly overcome, is that at first these methods are perceived as something artificial.
But as people master these methods, their effectiveness is significantly increased.
The next method is called the method of synaptics, or the unification of various objects.
Synaptics is a complex method of stimulating creative activity, which uses principles and techniques,
such as the brain storm, which you learned in the previous course on making decisions, and the method of analogy and association.
The method of synaptics was introduced by Gordon in the 1950s to overcome the orthodox way of thinking,
to go beyond the traditional ways and methods of solving problems.
The principle of this method is that the spontaneous activity of the human brain is oriented to the study and solution of a problem in a specially selected group of people by using analogies.
I would like to emphasize that the group of people in this case is specially selected.
These are specialists in different areas of activity.
What is the strategy of this method?
In addition to the fact that the group of specialists of different professions is looking for a solution,
the second specific feature is that the members of the synaptic group do not know the essence of the problem before starting work.
Only some part of the existing problem can be known to them.
Of course, the head knows everything.
And according to the procedure, the game or meeting of the synaptic group usually begins not with the formulation of the problem as a whole,
but with the discussion of its separate aspects, the aspects intended by the head.
That is, we first discuss the elements as a whole, and then make a synthesis and generalization.
According to the procedure, first, the participants present to themselves the discussed problem,
and all, including the expert, offer their own options for its definition.
The head must record all this and present it for general review.
Thus, each of the participants in the meeting becomes, as it were, the author, the owner of the formulation of the problem,
and he usually has a desire to defend his formulation, promote the solution in his own way, and so on.
That is, he becomes an interested person.
The next step, if you will, is that it is necessary to clear everything that is proposed from completely obvious solutions.
After all, we are talking about creating a creative solution.
And then you need to turn the unusual into the usual, that is, to find analogies that will allow to express the given problem in terms that are well understood by all members of the synaptic group.
At the next stage, the main difficulties and problems that prevent the solution of the problem are determined.
And then the chairman, asking the guiding questions, offers to give a solution using one of the types of analogies.
There are four types of analogies.
Direct, subjective, symbolic and fantastic.
In the case of direct analogies, relative objects are compared.
They provide a useful result for complex systems provided that the parameters of the desired problem are adequate to the parameters of the analog.
Subjective or personal analogies provide for the mental reincarnation of the participant.
It is necessary to imagine yourself as an object of analysis.
In your textbook, there is an example that in the confectionery industry a large number of walnuts is required, which is very difficult to clean.
The core of walnuts is to be cleaned.
In order to get them, someone imagined himself as a walnut and imagined how he would tear this shell.
So the idea appeared to break walnuts with pumped compressed air.
There are a number of examples.
In the case of symbolic analogies, poetic metaphors and comparisons are used, in which the characteristics of a given object are identified with the characteristics of another.
And finally, the fantastic analogy provides for the mental representation of things as they are not really, but as we would like to see them, taking into account the fantasy.
For example, we would like the road to exist only where the wheels of cars touch it.
And so on.
In the process of the game, the members of the group, in the process of the synoptic session, the members of the group in a free manner should play each leading question of the chairman.
And catch the moment when a promising idea appears.
Develop this idea wordily until the moment when the members of the synoptic group can build a mechanism or a prototype of the device.
Unlike the methods of thinking hats and chairs, solving problems using the method of synoptics requires much more time.
It can be even several weeks at a full working day.
At the same time, part of the time is spent on discussion, and the other part is spent on practical work, building prototypes, models, and so on.
This is where we finish our discussion on the methods of decision-making.
But if we make a decision soon, it is necessary and appropriate to talk about the mistakes that managers make when making decisions.
What is the role of decision-making?
I have said many times that managers must make decisions quickly in the modern world.
And a quick decision brings a risk and the commitment to make big mistakes or frequent mistakes.
Therefore, theoreticians and practitioners in the field of management have made a good generalization,
which allows to present a list of the most typical mistakes that managers face.
Why? To help them to look at possible mistakes before the decision is made,
and to learn to make better and more effective decisions on their or someone else's mistakes.
Moreover, a mistake is a mistake.
One mistake can become a starting point for the next, sometimes even creative decision,
and some mistakes, especially at the strategic level, can irrevocably ruin the business, even a long-standing business on the market.
What are the main reasons for making a decision?
Most often, this reason is hidden in the method of their acceptance.
The options of choice, alternatives, accurate information, all advantages and disadvantages, the prediction was inaccurate, and so on, were not clearly defined.
But there is another reason why a person makes a mistake.
And it is not about the collected information or the wrong approach to the research.
Sometimes the human brain works in such a way that we simply make a wrong choice, even having enough relevant information.
In this course, we will present you with typical mistakes,
in the way they are grouped by three specialists in this field.
These are Matthias Nölke, Paul Natt and John Hammond.
Matthias Nölke calls the six most common mistakes when making a decision.
The first is that you postpone the decision.
The second is that you judge everything too hastily, as an antithesis.
The third is that you rely entirely on your feelings, that is, a completely intuitive decision.
The fourth mistake is very serious and often occurs,
that a person making a decision does not separate the main from the secondary,
and tries to decide both, and sometimes more often only the secondary.
The fifth mistake is that a person spends too much energy on making a decision.
And the sixth is that he tries to decide only the easiest decision, postponing the decision for later.
If you postpone a decision, think for yourself.
After all, many of us often postpone a decision.
I will think about it later.
Why is it that a decision is postponed most often?
First of all, a person is afraid of the risk of responsibility.
If the decision has already been made, then the mistake will have to be answered,
better postponed, maybe the matter will be resolved somehow by itself.
And another reason is that as soon as you make a decision,
all other decisions are already losing their relevance.
And some people want the horizon to be open to them.
And suddenly, in a day or two, we will find evidence that this is not the best alternative, but some other.
What consequences can postponing a decision have?
The fact is that most often in practice it happens in such a way
that the situation does not improve and the matter does not improve by itself,
but on the contrary, the conflict in the situation becomes even more complicated,
sharpened, and the time for its decision is already lost and it becomes even harder to make a decision.
Well, in the business world, there is certainly a danger, a probability,
that someone will make this decision instead of you and thus leave you behind.
What does it mean to judge a decision, to make a decision too hastily?
That is, to accept it before all the necessary and sufficient information is collected for making this decision.
When an analysis of your capabilities, resources, and so on, is done,
very often, we do not talk in this case about intuitive decision making, purely intuitive,
sometimes it is just a desire to be ahead, to take, if you want, a bull by the horns,
to take the lead over the situation so as not to be late, as in the previous case.
Unfortunately, in such cases, decisions are often lacking in foundation,
the risk of making a wrong decision increases many times,
a decision that will be difficult to explain, analyze, and so on.
And what is not unimportant, such a hasty decision makes the person who made this decision very vulnerable to manipulation.
He will not be able to prove why he made this decision,
proposed this particular action, and not another, because the strategy was practically not developed.
If, when making a decision, the manager relies only on his feelings,
then we say that he makes the decision intuitively.
The main drawback of an intuitive decision, we talked about this at the beginning of the course,
is that they cannot be rethought, analyzed, and proved to colleagues why exactly so,
and not just the way they are.
A very serious mistake is not being able to separate the main from the secondary.
Very often it is associated with the inability to structure your thinking,
to focus your attention on important points, and to leave insignificant ones aside.
A person tries to solve both of these, and as a result,
there is such an expression, in fact, the thought spreads like wildfire,
and in order to focus on the main, he lacks either skill,
or in the future, time to solve the main problem, the main reason, the primary reason.
The consequences of this are extremely sad.
Most likely, when it becomes clear that there is no longer any time to delay and investigate,
the decision will be made randomly,
and at the same time, the risk of making a wrong decision increases many times.
Since the thinking, the rethinking was not structured,
it will be very difficult to make a historical analysis of the decision,
to understand what the mistake was, and how to avoid it in the future,
if the decision is accidentally correct,
then it will be difficult to repeat it in the future due to the same reasons.
Another mistake is spending too much energy,
which is understood in this case under the expense of energy.
Partly, it may be due to the indecisiveness of a person,
or due to the mistake of postponing the problem,
and sometimes it's just a characteristic of a person who is called a perfectionist,
they want to work everything out carefully, a huge amount of information is collected,
it is carefully analyzed, a large number of specialists are attracted to critical study of the process,
in order to reduce the risk of mistakes.
On the one hand, in general, it looks probably not bad, reasonable,
but there must be moderation in everything.
Hippocrates once said,
moderation is the mother of virtue,
so it is better to avoid this mistake,
not to collect more information than is necessary for making decisions,
because collecting additional information,
and the use of a small number of people,
can require excessive attraction of resources,
that is, it will be very expensive.
Another danger is that in this regard,
a very insignificant issue can be worked out,
one of the sides of the problem,
and to solve really relevant problems or complex problems,
there will be no resources or time,
time is also a resource.
And another interesting aspect is that
such a long, tedious study of the situation,
a huge amount of information,
in the end, can become unpleasant for a person making a decision,
who is just tired of it,
and tries to get away from all this,
giving the right to someone else to solve this problem.
And the last mistake is the desire to solve the easiest problems.
Because the more difficult the task,
this is my point of view,
the more serious the responsibility comes after making a decision.
And many people are happy to deal with numerous simple problems,
which they probably know how to solve.
But the solution of complex problems,
problematic situations, and so on,
is transferred to someone else.
Sometimes this departure from complex problems
can play a positive role,
but sooner or later,
your subordinates will understand that you are leaving the solution of complex,
pressing problems, and this threatens you with loss of influence.
And as soon as your position, your influence,
is shaken,
very soon someone will come to free you from the need to make complex decisions,
and will make them instead of you.
It is quite possible that decisions made by others
will go against your personal and professional interests.
The most detailed description of typical mistakes made by managers
is in the book by Paul Nath.
Despite the fact that he mentions only three typical mistakes,
he gives a very good analysis of what traps these three mistakes can lead to,
gives a detailed description of these traps,
and recommendations on how not to make mistakes and not to fall into traps.
So, three mistakes that Paul Nath calls
1. Constant use of approach, which leads to failure,
and not the approach of the appropriate and best practice.
2. The hasty decision to use valuable resources
before all the necessary facts are collected.
3. Spending time and money to demonstrate that the work is not done in vain.
And then, revealing the topic, Paul says that three mistakes create seven traps
that fall into the decision-making process,
and which ultimately lead to the adoption of ineffective decisions.
Paul calls seven traps that those who make decisions can fall into.
The first is following the wrong directions that do not coincide with the facts.
Who can give these directions? Either the person above, or the owner, and so on.
The second is ignoring potential barriers in the path of decision-making.
Also, the lack of clear goals that lead to uncertainty
and greatly reduce the overall work of the organization.
It can also be a lack of desire to look for more effective ideas and approaches,
in addition to those that are already used to it, and in which it is very convenient and comfortable to work.
The next trap is that the collection and analysis of information
takes place somewhat pre-emptively.
That is, either only the data that supports one opinion is collected,
or those that are convenient are analyzed from this collected information.
Unfortunately, this is a trap that is very common in the world of research,
in the world of preparation of decision-making.
Sometimes it is made out of malicious intent,
and sometimes people who are so-called conscientiously deluded can fall into this trap.
The sixth trap is that in the process of preparation and decision-making,
there are many aspects related to ethical issues and problems.
Without thinking about it, managers can ignore this aspect,
and thus make a decision to provoke unnecessary conflicts in the teams or more serious problems.
And the seventh trap is that people ignore learning from their mistakes.
And, in general, while maintaining their status quo,
without recognizing the mistake, they try to do it again and again,
in the same way, stepping on the same rake.
You have written in great detail about traps in the curriculum.
Now we will discuss only the recommendations that Pol.nat gives for the best approaches to make the most effective decisions.
He says that you need to learn to use, to look for the best approaches at each stage of the process of decision-making.
That is, it is, first of all, preparation, within the framework of our course, it is preparation for decision-making.
To do this, you need to carry out an intensive search for new ideas, including using the methods that we discussed,
which correspond to the desired goals and openly assess possible options.
It is imperative to analyze the unrealistic, lost opportunities in order to make decisions more effective, more qualitative in the future.
And it is very important not to give chances to those forces that can block your actions to make a decision at the stage of either its preparation or implementation.
The second recommendation of Pol.nat, which absolutely agrees with all theorists and practitioners, is that you need to be focused on the problem.
You do not need to implement the first idea that came to mind, accompanying it with intensive and large-scale efforts to manipulate the facts.
That is, you do not need to create a visibility of the gigantic work carried out, but, in fact, to carry out a lot of useless, unnecessary work.
You need to use an approach that involves a thorough analysis of the collected information and which will lead to the best results.
And it is very important to plan enough time for the development of an effective solution that is aimed at solving the problem.
Since, having made a decision in a hurry, without allocating time and other resources, you can then pay a much higher price for eliminating problems.
The third recommendation of Pol.nat says that you need to spend resources reasonably. And the reasonableness will be as follows.
You need to spend more time and money on making a decision at the beginning, that is, at the stage of its preparation, and not on eliminating problems in the future.
Provide resources for the search for better alternatives and coordination of different points of view.
Make investments, that is, a certain kind of investment in financial and human resources, in the analysis of the problem, in the search for all viable alternatives.
And develop solutions that meet the needs of all interested parties.
In addition to the textbook, of course, in which it is still said in short, I highly recommend you read the book by Pol.nat, How to Avoid Traps and Errors Leading to Disaster.
The book is written in English and is called Why Decisions Fail.
The next author of the generalization of typical errors, or rather authors, is John Hammond, Ralph Kinney and Howard Raiff.
They studied 8 psychological errors, in which managers or just people are most often caught when making decisions.
These errors, they called themselves e-correction, status quo, an attempt to justify the previous decision, a trap of the desired and real, incorrect wording, over-insurance and memory permanence.
And the trap of e-correction makes it too important to give the original information.
That is, we, as they say, are so hooked on what we once heard or saw.
This feature of human thinking, the work of the human brain can be used even to push you to the wrong decision,
if there are forces in this interested and which pursue their hidden goals.
The next trap is called the desire to maintain the status quo.
That is, we all want everything to stay as it is.
And this makes us adhere to the current state of things, even if there is a better alternative choice.
What are irreversible costs that push us to repeat past mistakes?
If we have already made a decision that was not very successful, but at the same time we have spent a certain amount of resources,
then a person, purely psychologically, strives to protect himself and his decision.
He tries to do the same again and again and prove that the situation, let's say, did not go as planned, but the decision was actually correct, and so on.
Very often we take what is desirable for what is real, and we begin to...
That is, we first form our opinion about how it should be, and then, with the energy worthy of the best application, we begin to look for confirmation of this opinion.
In this case, we very often fall into the trap that Paul Natt was talking about.
We begin to selectively approach the selection of information, in fact, rejecting all that information, those facts that contradict our opinion.
Very often the leaders of the upper level fall into such a trap.
The mistake of the wrong formulation of the problem is obviously a trap.
We have discussed it many times, and I think it is absolutely transparent for understanding.
If the problem is initially formulated incorrectly, then the decision, in fact, will be...
That is, the whole process of making a decision will go down the wrong path, and it is unlikely that the decision will be effective.
The next trap is self-confidence.
In fact, we overestimate our own abilities to predict and give an accurate assessment.
A person considers himself an expert, a person considers himself a connoisseur in this field, and is too dependent on his judgments.
The other side and another trap is the desire to overestimate yourself.
On the contrary, a person becomes overly careful when predicting unlikely events.
This trap is very well connected with the topic we discussed with Matias Nölke and Paul Hnat.
There is another trap that John Hammond talks about.
It is the permanence of memory, which makes us attach too much importance to the tragic events of the past.
As a simple example, John Hammond and the authors give such an example.
If you drive a car, you can say with 99% certainty that after a while you will drive much more carefully.
The last set of mistakes I would like to talk about is the generalization of my experience and theoretical knowledge
that I have gained during my own work.
These are mistakes related to the study.
One way or another, they will be in conflict with what we have just discussed.
Nevertheless, let's list them.
1. The purpose of the study is unclear or the true purpose is not brought to the knowledge of the performers.
The first mistake related to conducting scientific research appears at the very beginning
and is related to the fact that at the beginning of the study the purpose may not be clear.
Or, which is also quite often the case, the true purpose is not brought to the knowledge of the performers.
In this case, it is very difficult for the performers to choose the correct methodology and collect relevant information.
2. The second mistake has already been discussed with you many times.
It is an incorrectly formulated problem, and therefore the purpose of the study and the whole plan of conducting the study.
3. The next mistake is related to the fact that the wrong strategy and methodology of conducting the study are chosen,
which does not allow to get reliable and reliable information.
4. The next mistake is also very common and is present in all authors we have discussed.
It is that the new information is selected in accordance with the already formed preferences.
That is, we are talking about the pre-conception in the collection of information.
5. Another mistake is related to the fact that the information collection is carried out for so long that the decision, in fact, loses relevance.
This can be evidenced by the fact that a person does not want to make a decision, and also by the fact that he simply creates a visibility of conducting the study, and in fact this does not happen.
But maybe this is a conscientious collection of a huge amount of information, and, in general, everything happens as we said.
If the information is collected reliably and reliably, then it does not mean that further mistakes are excluded.
Without preconceptions, the collected information can already be analyzed, generalized and presented in the interests of individual persons or groups.
Moreover, two situations are possible here. When a person who is collecting information in advance knows the preferences of the problem owner,
or he assumes that it will be well received by those who are provided with this information.
In any case, this distorts the real picture of the situation and can lead to an ineffective decision and lead the person making the decision to delusion.
The next mistake is due to the fact that the information collection is very fast, time is very saved and all other resources, and this leads to superficial analysis and unreliable conclusions.
The next mistake, which has already sounded in several other forms, is as follows.
The next mistake, and this was also noted by Paul Natt, is that the research can be carried out without compliance with the norms of corporate and general human ethics,
which can lead to the violation of the rights of individual members of the collective and to the emergence of conflicts in this collective.
Moreover, even the problem of putting or not putting research participants in the public knowledge of what is being studied is related to compliance with the norms of corporate and other ethics.
This is a question of ethics, which we discussed in great detail in the course of the research method.
And the last mistake, which has already become a cliché in reviews of dissertations, reports, and so on, is that the conclusions do not correspond to the results of the research.
This is a very common mistake, which can be associated with the fact that a person, when describing the results of the research or dissertation in his report,
keeps something else in mind, and in fact, the conclusion of the work is based not only on what is available for the reader in the report or the reader in the dissertation,
but also on what a person had in his mind. In this case, the work can be recognized as ineffective,
and the leader, having read such a report, will be forced to ask a large number of additional questions to understand why this conclusion was obtained.
Well, to conclude the discussion on mistakes, we will make a few sentences of conclusions.
The first is that mistakes, in fact, are not to be feared. On the one hand, you can protect yourself from mistakes and traps, and the best protection is knowledge.
That is, what we have discussed now, what you can read in addition, will allow you to learn to recognize these traps and avoid them, and, accordingly, will give you more confidence in making decisions.
But at the same time, you need to learn on your own, to be able to learn from your mistakes. After all, every unsuccessful attempt gives new knowledge and new information.
If the decision was made based on well-selected, analyzed information, that is, it was worked out, then nothing will prevent you from making an analysis of what was done in order to avoid it later.
In the practice of business, in many successful companies, it is even customary to study mistakes.
There, employees are not punished for their mistakes, because it allows you to find and determine the weak points in order to do your job better in the future.
The following recommendation says that you need to openly admit your mistakes. You know, there is such a thing as a wish. If you laugh at yourself, others will not laugh at you anymore. Not interesting.
In the same way, if you try to hide all the time that you made a mistake, sooner or later they will find out about it, they will talk behind your back, so it is better to openly admit your mistake and maybe even ask for advice on how to avoid it in the future.
If you are a boss, then Robert Townsend says that you do not need to blame your colleagues for mistakes and gives such a phrase as an example.
If you slap your child every time he falls, he will never like to walk. Therefore, in order for your subordinates to conduct qualitative research, prepare effective solutions for you and make effective management decisions themselves,
they must be sure that they will not be fired for making a mistake.
If you will fix the main goals and tasks of the project, as well as the criteria in accordance with which the decision can be made or rejected.
It is also important to be responsible for the collection and preparation of information for making a decision and to conduct a planned work with information, focusing on the planned results.
It is also important to plan the work on the collection and analysis of information on the results and deadlines of the study, generalization, preparation of prototypes, and so on.
That is, the work must be conducted in a planned manner.
And the last thing we just discussed. The correctness of the management decision is guaranteed. Not 100%, of course, but nevertheless, if you learn to either avoid mistakes or traps or make correct conclusions from a failed experience.
Well, now thank you all for your attention. I wish you all the best in business and personal happiness. All the best!